The revised text first appeared in Great Britain in a three-volume
hardcover ‘Second Edition’ from Allen & Unwin on 27 October 1966.
But again there were problems. Although the revisions Tolkien sent
to America of the text itself were available to be utilized in the new
British edition, his extensive revisions to the appendices were lost
after being entered into the Ballantine edition. Allen & Unwin were
forced to reset the appendices using the copy as published in the first
Ballantine edition. This did not include Tolkien’s second, small set
of revisions sent to Ballantine; but, more significantly, it did include
a great number of errors and omissions, many of which were not
discovered until long afterwards. Thus, in the appendices, a close
scrutiny of the first edition text and of the much later corrected
impressions of the second edition is necessary to discern whether any
particular change in this edition is authorial or erroneous.
In America, the revised text appeared in hardcover in the three-
volume edition published by Houghton Mifflin on 27 February 1967.
This text was evidently photo-offset from the 1966 Allen & Unwin
three-volume hardcover, and is thus consistent with it. Aside from
the first printing of this second Houghton Mifflin edition, which has
a 1967 date on the title page, none of the many reprintings is dated.
After the initial printings of this edition, which bore a 1966 copyright
notice, the date of copyright was changed in 1965 to match the state-
ment in the Ballantine edition. This change has caused a great deal
of confusion for librarians and other researchers who have tried to
sort out the sequence of publication of these editions.
Meanwhile, Tolkien spent much of the summer of 1966 further
revising the text. In June he learned that any more revisions were too
late for inclusion in the 1966 Allen & Unwin second edition, and he
recorded in his diary: ‘But I am attempting to complete my work [on
the revisions] – I cannot leave it while it is all in my mind. So much
time has been wasted in all my work by this constant breaking of
threads.’ This was the last major set of revisions Tolkien himself
made to the text during his lifetime. They were added to the second
impression (1967) of the three-volume hardcover Allen & Unwin
second edition. The revisions themselves mostly include corrections
of nomenclature and attempts at consistency of usage throughout the
three volumes. Some small alterations were made by Tolkien in the
1969 one-volume India paper edition.
J.R.R. Tolkien died in 1973. His third son and literary executor,
Christopher Tolkien, sent a large number of further corrections of
misprints, mainly in the appendices and index, to Allen & Unwin
for use in their editions in 1974. Most of these corrections were
typographical, and in line with his father’s expressed intent in his
own check copies.